Add new schema linter rules + custom rules (#498)
apollographql/docs: src/content/graphos/delivery/linter-rules.mdx

description: Reference
---

> This reference lists the default rules that you can enforce with [GraphOS schema linting](./schema-linter/). You can also create [custom rules](#custom-rules) to forbid or require prefixes or suffixes you define on specific schema elements.

Reviewer: This is only a curious question - do we think there is a better term than "custom rule" because a custom rule to an enterprise customer might mean completely custom - ability to write a rule about whatever!

Author: I was wondering about this myself. Will these custom rules always be limited to prefix/suffix naming conventions, or will we eventually add the ability to add other types of rules?

Author: Discussed live: no definite plans for other kinds of custom rules. Let's go with "customized".

}

#highlight-start
query GetUsers {

>   # Don't define operations in a schema document

Author: https://github.com/apollographql/docs/pull/498/commits/5778e1844390e00d136819430e66885d2bb9947a

}
```

> #### `FIELDS_HAVE_DESCRIPTIONS_QUERY_MUTATION`

Reviewer: @Meschreiber very very sorry about this! I think we are not going to do this rule. Instead we are going to do something similar to the custom prefix/suffix rule. Where we allow the user to select an element and then dynamically generate a description rule based on the selection. For example: 
- schema `SCHEMA_REQUIRE_DESCRIPTION`
- query / mutation fields `FIELDS_REQUIRE_DESCRIPTION_QUERY_MUTATION`
- all fields `FIELDS_REQUIRE_DESCRIPTION_ALL`
- types (includes objects, enums, unions, interfaces, input)
- arguments
- directives (can they have their own description?)

CC: @swcollard

Reviewer 2: > directives (can they have their own description?)

Directive definitions can have descriptions, but the usages of directives do not

Author: @papollosc @swcollard

Can users specify "some vs. all" for all elements, or is that only for fields, for example in `FIELDS_REQUIRE_DESCRIPTION_QUERY_MUTATION` vs `FIELDS_REQUIRE_DESCRIPTION_ALL`

Author: Discussed live: `FIELDS_REQUIRE_DESCRIPTION_QUERY_MUTATION` is an exception, otherwise it can be `all`

}
```

#### `DEFINED_TYPES_ARE_USED`

All defined types are used at least once in the schema.

> Types that are defined but then not used are most likely due to a mistake such as incomplete refactoring. Unused types take up space and can confuse readers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unused types commonly appear after you refactor other parts of your schema. You should remove unused types to prevent confusion.
```

<p style="margin-bottom: 0">❌</p>

```graphql title="schema.graphql"

> type someUnusedType { # Also fails the TYPE_SUFFIX rule!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
type SomeUnusedType { # Also fails the TYPE_SUFFIX rule!
```

Currently _also_ fails the `TYPE_NAMES_SHOULD_BE_PASCAL_CASE` rule 😄

  name: String!

> }
> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
}

type Query {
  hello: String!
}
```
````

Reviewer 3: I might also define `Query` here to emphasize the fact that no other type is using `SomeUnusedType`

}
```

<hr />

#### `TAG_DIRECTIVE_USES_UNKNOWN_NAME`

The `@tag` directive should always use an approved value for its `name` argument. You specify approved values in [GraphOS Studio](./schema-linter/#configuring-the-linter).

## Custom rules

> You can create custom rules to forbid or require certain terms as prefixes or suffixes in a specific schema element. You can create rules for the following elements:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can create custom linter rules to forbid or require certain strings as the prefix or suffix for different schema elements. You can create rules for the following elements:
```

> - Fields

Author: Need to verify the elements.

Reviewer 3: I bet at least a few of these won't be supported

- Types
- Objects
- Interfaces
- Inputs
- Enums
- Unions

> A rule can include multiple strings to forbid or require, but each rule can _either_ only forbid _or_ require the terms and can only apply to one schema element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A single rule can specify multiple strings to forbid _or_ require (not both) for a particular schema element. If you create a "require" rule and specify multiple strings, each schema element can use _any one_ of the specified strings.
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not 100% sure the feature works as I've described in this edit, but I kind of imagine it _has_ to, and we should check w/ the linter folks

> ### Custom rule configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Creating a custom rule
```

Reviewer 3: Hm actually, I would recommend moving this content into the main `schema-linter.mdx` file, as a subsection of the "Configuring the linter" section (sibling of "Setting severity levels").  This page is more of a lookup reference for individual rules, whereas that other page describes how to use all this stuff _in Studio_, which feels like a better fit

Then in this reference page, We can still have a section called `Custom rules`, and it describes what they are and what their name structure looks like, then links over to the main article for the details of creating them

Author: Good call.

> To create a new rule, click the **+** button above your list of linter rules.

Reviewer 3: After moving this over to the `schema-linter` core article, see if it feels necessary to include any preamble context along the lines of

> You create linter rules in [GraphOS Studio](https://studio.apollographql.com/?referrer=docs-content) from the linter configuration blah blah

Possibly not necessary from that position!

<img
  className="screenshot"
  src="../img/schema-rules/create-new-rule.jpg"
  alt="To-do: How to create a new rule"
  width="300"
/>

In the modal that opens, select the following:

> - Which **Schema element** you want to apply the rule to

Author: Subject to change given final UI

> - Whether you want to **Forbid** or **Require** certain terms

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Whether you want to **Forbid** or **Require** certain strings
```

> - Whether the terms should be considered **Prefixes** or **Suffixes**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Whether the strings are **Prefixes** or **Suffixes**
```

> - The **Strings** the rule should check for; the allowed characters are `[A-Z]`, `[a-z]`, `[0-9]`, and `[_]`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The list of **Strings** to check for. Allowed characters are `[A-Z]`, `[a-z]`, `[0-9]`, and `[_]`
    - Note that strings are case-sensitive.
```

Reviewer 3: I recommend avoiding semicolons outside of code that uses them (obviously up to you moving forward of course 😄 ).

> 
> > **Note:** Rules are case-sensitive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: Folded into above as a sub-bullet

> Apollo dynamically generates the rule name based on your selections. For example, if you create a rule forbidding certain prefixes for interfaces, the rule name would be `INTERFACE_FORBID_USER_DEFINED_PREFIX`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GraphOS dynamically generates the rule name based on your selections. For example, if you create a rule forbidding certain prefixes for interfaces, the resulting rule name is `INTERFACE_FORBID_USER_DEFINED_PREFIX`.
```

Reviewer 3: I guess I generally avoid the subjunctive

Reviewer 3: (And any time it's specifically our cloud platform that does a thing, recommend "GraphOS" in place of "Apollo")

<img
  className="screenshot"
  src="../img/schema-rules/new-rule-modal.jpg"
  alt="To-do: New rule modal"
  width="300"
/>

> You can add as many rules as you like by clicking **Add another rule**. Once you've finished, don't forget to click **Create**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can add as many rules as you want by clicking **Add another rule**. When you're done, click **Create**.
```

Reviewer 3: "want" is definitely "brutal-er" than "like", but it's less ambiguous for non-native English readers and machine translation

Reviewer 3: Similarly, recommend avoiding "once" in favor of "when" or "after", due to the comparative ambiguity of "once"

> Your custom rules appear in the list of rules with the **Custom** tag. Once created, you can edit them by clicking the pencil icon on the right of the rule's name.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your custom rules appear with a **CUSTOM** tag in the rule list of rules with the **Custom** tag. You can edit a custom rule by clicking the pencil icon to the right of its name:

[screenshot]
```

> As with other linter rules, you can [configure their severity](./schema-linter/#setting-severity-levels), including setting their severity to **Ignore**, if you want to disable them. To delete a rule, click the pencil icon and then click the trash can icon next to it in the custom rule modal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As with built-in linter rules, you can set a custom rule's [severity level](./schema-linter/#setting-severity-levels). To delete a rule, click the pencil icon and then click the trash can icon next to it in the custom rule modal.
```

}
```

<hr />

#### `TAG_DIRECTIVE_USES_UNKNOWN_NAME`

The `@tag` directive should always use an approved value for its `name` argument. You specify approved values in [GraphOS Studio](./schema-linter/#configuring-the-linter).

### Custom rules

You can create custom prefix and suffix rules beyond the built-in ones. These rules have the following naming convention: `{ELEMENT_NAME}_{FORBID|REQUIRE}_USER_DEFINED_{PREFIX|SUFFIX}`, for example, `INTERFACE_FORBID_USER_DEFINED_PREFIX`.

This rule would include a list of strings to forbid as prefixes in interface names.

> A single rule can specify multiple strings to forbid _or_ require (not both) for a particular schema element. If you create a "require" rule and specify multiple strings, each schema element can use _any one_ of the specified strings. Rules forbidding strings forbid _all_ the strings you include.

Reviewer: Another callout I would make is that if the string provided conflicts with an existing rule, then we throw an error at the time of creating the custom rule. For example, let's say you have enabled the rule `FIELD_NAMES_SHOULD_BE_CAMELCASE` and then you provide a rule `FIELD_REQUIRE_USER_DEFINED_PREFIX` and the prefix is let's say `BADPREFIX` then this will throw an error at the time of creating the rule because it conflicts with the other camelcase rule. CC: @swcollard

Reviewer 2: Do we also want to split out these documentation additions into separate PRs so we can merge them as we add rules?

Author: Good call, can do!

Author: @papollosc , question on the string validation error you mentioned:

I'm guessing we won't throw an error if a rule the user is creating conflicts with a _disabled_ rule. Is that right? E.g. from your example, they've disabled the camelcase rule and create a prefix rule that requires strings that aren't camelcase.

And if so: it's possible that a user could create conflicting rules that only become conflicts when a user enables a native rule. So I'm guessing we'll also validate when users turn on/off rules then?
